Add in-page wizard design guidelines (#1479)
patternfly/patternfly-org: packages/patternfly-4/content/design-guidelines/usage-and-behavior/wizard/design.md

path: "/design-guidelines/usage-and-behavior/wizard"
---
# Wizard
Wizards provide a guided workflow that offers a path to complete a task, create an object or objects, or finish a series of steps for some other outcome. Wizards should incite trust in the user and guide them through an otherwise overwhelming experience.

Use a wizard when

* The task is long/complex and benefits from being broken into smaller more manageable steps. This allows the user to focus on smaller tasks and not feel overwhelmed.
* There is a known step by step order of tasks, and these steps can be broken up into clearly defined categories/sections which can be indicated via labels on the steps.
* This process is prescriptive. The actions a user takes in one step influence downstream steps.
* A simple form is not sufficient to aid a user in completing a task

Avoid using a wizard for simple data entry tasks in which a basic form would suffice.

## Types of wizards
Wizards can be modal or placed within the content area of a page.

### Modal wizards
![modal wizard](./img/wizard-progressive-step3-new.png)

> The modal wizard lives in a modal dialog. The width and height of the modal is variable and should be sized to comfortably fit the contents of the wizard at typical desktop screen resolutions. In most cases, the modal wizard is recommended as it will keep users focused on the task at hand. Users must either complete all of the steps of the wizard or cancel before navigating elsewhere within an application.

Reviewer: Should we say that the wizard's height/width is variable? We have a standard size modal wizard and a full page modal wizard. They sizes could be adjusted by overriding the variables but do want to recommend that?

Author: Good question @matthewcarleton One of the reasons that I thought it was important to point this out was that often folks think the modal wizard won't work for them because the size is too constrained. But it does not have to be. They can always override these variables if they need to. @kybaker @mcoker do you have any thoughts about this?

Reviewer: Ya that makes sense. Maybe we should just clarify that it has a full page modifier as well as the default size to clarify.

Author: OK. I made a small change that hopefully makes this more apparent.

## Elements of a wizard
Except where noted, modal and in-page wizards have the same elements and behaviors. For the sake of simplicity, all screens here show the modal wizard.

### Simple wizard

![simple-wizard](./img/standard-wizard.png)

1. **Header (modal wizard only):** Modal wizards always have a header area that minimally contains the wizard title and a close button. The title should be action oriented and reflect the intended outcome of the wizard, e.g. "Create resource." You may optionally also include a description below the wizard title.
2. **Steps sidebar:** Enumerated steps are displayed in the sidebar. Steps can be fixed or updated as the user proceeds through the process (see Progressive Wizard).
3. **Visited step:** A step that has been already visited. In most cases users can click this step to return to a prior point in the flow.
4. **Current step:** The current step is always highlighted.
5. **Disabled step:** Steps that follow the current step are usually disabled to enforce the sequential flow.

> 6. **Step title:** The Step title is unique to each step, and should reinforce the outcome of the individual step. It may match the Current step indicated in the steps sidebar, or as in the example image, it may be more verbose.

Reviewer: Are there step titles in the progressive wizard now? If not maybe we should state that.

Author: There should be step titles. Why wouldn't there be?

Reviewer: Ya
Maybe I’m wrong I thought there wasn’t any the last time I looked

Author: @matthewcarleton Are you referring to what's being called a "Progressive Form?:" https://github.com/patternfly/patternfly-next/issues/1242  That still needs to be finalized and this documentation may need to be updated once we formally introduce that to the library.

Reviewer: Ah of course. I was mixing these up. I’m thinking of the progressive form inside the wizard. Anyway we can revisit if needed when that gets introduced.

In some cases the result of a wizard is to dispatch a task to the background to execute changes in the back end. In these circumstances, we recommend that you provide a navigation link to monitor task progress and/or simply a Close button.

### Mobile considerations
When viewing a wizard on a mobile device, the steps sidebar will be hidden and collapse into a drop down menu panel as shown below.

![wizard on mobile](./img/mobile-wizard.png)

## Usage

### In-page wizard
A wizard may be embedded in a page as shown below.

![wizard in a page](./img/wizard-in-page.png)

Note that when a wizard is embedded into a page, the wizard title and description are placed within the page header. The same standards that were defined for usage of the title and description for modal wizards should be applied here.

When a wizard is placed in the context of a page, it allows some freedom that is not available using the standard modal approach.

* Modals may be opened from the wizard to examine required information or perform subtask that are related to, but not part of, the wizard workflow.

> * User use can navigation away from the wizard to look up information or perform some prerequisite task.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* User can navigate away from the wizard to look up information or perform some prerequisite task.
```
